Ask a mathematician to solve a problem, an engineer to design a complex structure or a politician to compose a speech, and they will reach for a pad of paper. Take away their ability to write and suddenly there are problems they cannot solve, insights they cannot reach and thoughts they cannot think. Writing is not just a record of thought but a [medium for thought](https://books.google.com/books?id=1cgwUvk3OiIC&lpg=PR25&ots=54woRKJCQd&pg=PR26#v=onepage&q&f=false) - a tool that quite literally makes the wielder more intelligent.

Computing has the potential to be the same kind of tool, but pieces are missing. In the old world anyone could follow a paper-trail, edit a blueprint, debug mistakes, combine information and invent new processes. Today if your calendar forgets dates or your company website has missing pages your only resort is to call the village scribe for help.

Just as modern uses of writing look nothing like the day-to-day jobs of medieval scribes, we don't expect that a computer-literate civilization would spend their time building web servers and parsing json. We focus instead on the underlying tasks that people care about: communicating, sharing information and ideas, modelling systems, and automating processes. Current programming tools are clearly not fit for this purpose though. Despite the clear benefits and a wealth of resources, most people who try to learn to program fail to reach the point where their skills are useful in their own lives.

Programmers have very strong opinions on why that is and what's wrong with programming - not enough types, too many types, not using the right methodology, wrong kind of people etc - but few go beyond anecdotes. We dug into research, conducted our own tests, and started collecting data to help us understand how we could begin to fix things. From that data, it's clear that there are much more fundamental problems than how we organize our unit tests or whether we use factories. At its core, programming today is:

__Complicated__. Specifically, there is a huge gulf between the abstractions presented and the [actual tasks](https://books.google.com/books?id=0drDRT370eoC&lpg=PA66&ots=eFiY0jPxjz&dq=small%20matter%20of%20programming%20control%20flow&pg=PA59#v=onepage&q=task-specific&f=false) that most people want to accomplish. Something as simple as checking whether an email inbox is empty in today's popular languages requires learning about control flow, variable scoping, data structures, classes and objects, command lines, IMAP, exception handling etc. Even for professional programmers, for the vast majority of tasks our existing tools operate at a level of abstraction far below our actual concerns.

__Unhelpful__. We use tools that [provide no support for the most basic interactions](http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~NatProg/papers/MyersICPC2013NatProg.pdf). Simple common questions like 'how did this variable get set to null' can only be answered by [tedious manual effort](http://scattered-thoughts.net/blog/2014/05/17/pain-we-forgot/). Simple changes require recompiling, rerunning and repeating interactions just to get back to the same state. Good practices like using version control require additional effort and knowledge rather than being automatic.

__Excessively stateful__. Designing and simulating time-varying processes is an [incredibly difficult skill](https://books.google.com/books?id=0drDRT370eoC&lpg=PA66&ots=eFiY0jPxjz&dq=small%20matter%20of%20programming%20control%20flow&pg=PA47#v=snippet&q=control&f=false) that takes years to master. Making control-flow the fundamental building block of programming means that this cost has to be paid all the time, even though most problems [are relatively static](http://shaffner.us/cs/papers/tarpit.pdf).

__Indirect and invisible__. Humans cope well with complex systems when they can be mapped to concrete, physical metaphors which can be directly manipulated - folders full of files, grids of numbers, boxes and arrows etc. In contrast, most programming languages are built on metaphors like classes and functions that can only be explored and manipulated at a distance. In contrast to almost every other interface the average person encounters, almost all programming languages and tools tell you nothing unless you explicitly ask for it, and keep nothing unless you explicitly store it. The result is that it's incredibly hard to form a mental model of what is actually happening.

__Entangled with the machine__. Much of programming consists of managing and traversing data structures. Subsequent code is entangled with these decisions such that changing the physical representation of data requires changing all the code that interacts with it, even though [data independence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_independence) has been practical [since the 70s](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IBM_System_R).

Most important of all, however, it is driven by an obsession with building applications as opposed to providing a medium through which we can think. The average person has no desire to build a website, but they do want to communicate information, be informed when things happen, or get the computer to do some task they do over and over again. The end goal of programming was never meant to be apps, the [pioneers of computing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Douglas_Engelbart) believed it was to provide us a new tool to solve problems with. That focus takes you in a wildly different direction than trying to imagine how we could more effectively build Facebook.

To date, widely-used tools for non-professional programmers (eg Excel, SQL, Labview) address the issues we mention above. They emphasize data-flow over control-flow, have tools for direct exploration and manipulation of data and avoid exposing details of the underlying machine (eg data-structures, order of execution). Again, most importantly though, they focus not on building applications, but instead on answering questions or providing tools to model the problems their users face. The use of these tools, while a form of programming, does not result in applications, it results in solutions.

So how can we extend these capabilities further? How do we provide a platform that enables people to wield computers as thinking tools? From our experiments and our research, we've found that it's focusing on data and providing simple, but powerful tools to work with it that has the best shot. The relational model can provide exactly that. Relational databases, now almost 50 years old have stood the test of time and proliferate through the world we live in. Nearly every piece of software touches a relational database at some point. We can do much more with the relational model than just store our users in tables though. [BOOM](http://boom.cs.berkeley.edu/) demonstrated that a relational data-flow language is suitable even for building complex distributed systems. More recently, we demonstrated that it is easy to build interactive GUI applications the same way. While Eve presents an unconventional use of it, the relational model is the foundation we've found that best fits what we're out to achieve.

The next step is to start honing the tools so that they match the level of abstraction we intend to work at, while not constraining us from doing something deeper. Eve should allow for fluidity and exploration in the same way that pen and paper help us explore our thoughts. We are certainly at just the beginning of that road, but the rationale is rather simple. We are trying to give the super power that is control of a computer to the masses. We are building effective tools for thinking, not a better or simpler version of programming - those would end up just being side effects of trying to empower the next generation of thinkers.
